---
title: cmput391 Winter 2021 Homework 2 -- OSM and Embedded SQL
author: Denilson Barbosa <denilson@ualberta.ca>
---


## Instructions:

* This programming assignment is meant to be completed individually or in pairs, under the **Consultation** model of collaboration as per the Computing Science [Department Course Policies](https://www.ualberta.ca/computing-science/links-and-resources/policy-information/department-course-policies).
* You **must not upload** *binary* files of any kind, or large text files to your GitHub repository, especially **XML files with map data or SQLite databases**. This will slow down the uploading of your solution, which caused problems in the past, especially close to the deadline.
* Your solution will be graded and must run on any of the machines in the instructional labs, without the installation of libraries or tools not already there.
* Your answers _must be on the GitHub repository created by following the instructions on eClass_. 
* That repository already has the folder structure for the assignment and the configuration file for automated testing. **DO NOT MODIFY** the directory structure nor the `.github/workflows/main.yml` file.
* Remember to _submit the URL of your repository through eClass_ **before the deadline**. 

## Learning Objectives

1. Understanding the [OpenStreetMap](https://www.openstreetmap.org/) (OSM) data model.
+ Extracting OSM data from a binary map file into an XML representation.
+ Writing one or more programs to parse the XML representation and extract data of interest.
+ Further practicing your knowledge of SQL.
+ Becoming acquainted with embedded SQL programming with SQLite3 and its C programming API.


## Part I -- Loading OSM data into SQLite

The [OSM data model](http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Elements) has four elements:

* A **node** represents a unique point on the Earth's surface; it has an `id` and a pair of `lat/lon` coordinates. A node can be used to represent a park bench, a water fountain, a phone booth, etc.
* A **way** is an ordered list of nodes, defining a path (called *polyline* in the OSM documentation) on the map. 
    * A path that starts and ends with the same node is said to be *closed* and represents an [area](http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Area) on the map (e.g., a lake, a farm or a building).
* A **relation** is a multi-purpose data structure that groups together several elements (e.g., multiple nodes and ways).
* A **tag** is a key-value pair, used to describe an element. OSM has a [predefined list of accepted tags](http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Map_Features), but users can add their own.

The **[minimum bounding rectangle (MBR)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimum_bounding_rectangle)** of a set **S** of points (or OSM `node` elements) is the smallest rectangle such that no element of **S** falls outside of that rectangle. A node that lies on the boundary of the rectangle is considered to be *inside* the rectangle.

### Q1 (5 marks)

In a sentence, your task is to write and document scripts and/or programs, in any language (as long as they run on the lab machines) to create a proper SQLite database with all nodes, paths and areas (closed paths) within the City of Edmonton, together with any tags associated with them, from an OSM map of Alberta. 

You need to use the [Osmosis](http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Osmosis) command-line Java tool to process the binary OSM data file and produce [XML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XML) files which are both human and machine readable. You will use map data encompassing the city of Edmonton. For this, you can download a recent map of Alberta from the [Canadian section of the Geofabrik.de download site](https://download.geofabrik.de/north-america/canada.html). You must extract *all* `node` and *all* `way` elements within the MBR containing all of the City of Edmonton. To find the coordinates of such MBR, use [the official boundaries of the City of Edmonton](https://data.edmonton.ca/Administrative/City-of-Edmonton-Corporate-Boundary/m45c-6may) described by approximately 8 thousand points (lat/lon coordinates). 

#### Extracting Map Data With Osmosis

Download and install Osmosis in your laptop or your home directory in a lab machine or in your own computer. Run Osmosis to extract an XML dataset for the city of Edmonton, providing the MBR of the city as a command line parameter to Osmosis. Call your output file `edmonton.osm` (note that an XML file need not have `xml` as extension).

Read [this](http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Osmosis/Detailed_Usage_0.45) to familiarize yourself with the command line parameters. You want to use the following ones (all in **one line** and in the order below):

```
--read-pbf <path to Alberta map>
--bounding-box bottom=... left=... top=... right=...
--write-xml edmonton.osm
```

#### Nodes

The XML file you created should have several thousand `<node ...>` elements like this one:

```xml
<node id="651244271" version="5" timestamp="2015-04-06T21:43:41Z" uid="156121" user="Ranek" changeset="30027314" lat="53.5269944" lon="-113.5267783"/>
```

Such nodes are to be stored in a table 

```sql
node (id integer, lat float, lon float)
```

Some of the `node` elements in the XML file span multiple lines and have `tag` elements nested within them (which you need to capture as well--see below):

```xml
<node id="869072261" version="1" timestamp="2010-08-19T17:54:42Z" uid="86952" user="xixi" changeset="5537291" lat="53.5919642" lon="-113.4798392">
  <tag k="source" v="CanVec 6.0 - NRCan"/>
  <tag k="addr:city" v="Edmonton"/>
  <tag k="addr:street" v="90 Street   North-west"/>
  <tag k="addr:housenumber" v="13128"/>
</node>
```

**NOTE about XML syntax:** in XML, *single-line* `node` elements are *empty* and hence can be closed succinctly in the same line (with `/>`). The *multi-line* elements, instead, are not empty and need to be closed explicitly withe a `</node>` tag.

#### Paths and Areas

Paths and areas are encoded as `way` elements. For example, [Athabasca Hall](https://osm.org/go/WPokIh8jA) looks like this:

```xml
<way id="336758065" version="3" timestamp="2017-09-06T18:01:32Z" uid="6511217" user="Arctic gnome" changeset="51789291">
  <nd ref="651244271"/>
  <nd ref="651244272"/>
  <nd ref="3441794532"/>
  <nd ref="651244273"/>
  <nd ref="651244274"/>
  <nd ref="3293394327"/>
  <nd ref="3117153980"/>
  <nd ref="651244254"/>
  <nd ref="3441794539"/>
  <nd ref="651244255"/>
  <nd ref="651244258"/>
  <nd ref="3117153985"/>
  <nd ref="651244270"/>
  <nd ref="651244271"/>
  <tag k="building" v="university"/>
  <tag k="name" v="Athabasca Hall"/>
  <tag k="short_name" v="ATH"/>
</way>
```

Each `<nd ...>` element refers to a node in the XML file identified by the `ref` attribute. Also, these elements are logically **ordered** in the same way they appear in the file. Paths (open or closed) must be represented in the database inside two tables:

```sql
way (id integer, closed boolean)
waypoint (wayid integer, ordinal integer, nodeid integer)
```

#### Tags

Finally, `tag` elements should be stored in two separate tables:

```sql
nodetag (id integer, k text, v text)
waytag  (id integer, k text, v text)
```

#### Constraints

The following constraints must be enforced **at all times**. Your solution will be tested with insertions, deletions and tuple updates meant to violate them.

1. Primary keys: `node(id)`  and  `way(id)` 
+ Foreign Keys:
    * `waypoint(wayid)` is a foreign key referencing `way(id)`
    * `waypoint(nodeid)` is a foreign key referencing `node(id)`
    * `nodetag(id)` is a foreign key referencing `node(id)`
    * `waytag(id)` is a foreign key referencing `way(id)`.
+ Other constraints
    * `closed` in `way` should be true **if and only if** the path is closed.
    * The `ordinal` values in `waypoint` form a **dense ordering**; that is: (1) each node is assigned **unique** ordinal between 1 and the number of nodes elements in the path. The ordinals should initially correspond to the order the nodes appear in the XML file.

Your solution **must** allow insertion, deletion and modification of tuples. Triggers that block all updates will be considered incorrect. Instead, your solution **must recompute** the ordering of the nodes and the value of the `closed` attribute after each valid update, as appropriate, so that the constraints are not violated.

**Notes**:

* There may be loops in a way, even if that way is not closed (because its first and last nodes are not the same). You can leave those ways in the database.
* There may be ways with references to nodes outside of the MBR given to Osmosis. Apparently, this happens with ways that are partially within the MBR (e.g., imagine a road that starts within the Edmonton MBR but ends outside of that MBR): Osmosis leaves all such ways intact, even if some of the nodes referenced in the way are outside of the MBR and therefore do not have a corresponding `<node>` element in Osmosis' output. You must remove all such references, to prevent foreign key violations.

#### Loading the XML Data into a SQLite Database

The final product of this part of the assignment is a database with the schema described above. Below we give a **suggestion** of how to do that. You are free to choose a different approach, and of course, you can discuss it with your TA beforehand. Regardless of the design you choose, you are free to either write programs that produce CSV or TSV files as output and load them by hand into SQLite **or** you can write programs that connect to SQLite and populate the tables with Embedded SQL.

**NOTE:** due to memory restrictions, you are **NOT** allowed to load the entire XML file in memory using DOM. Instead, we suggest you **scan** the file element by element. 

The proper way to do this is using the Simple API for XML (SAX) for this purpose. However, the XML file you are dealing with here is so simple that a less elegant alternative can work, which is to parse the file line by and decide what to do after each line. You should never do this for arbitrary XML files where you do not know a priori how many levels of nesting are used.

#### Naming convention

The test scripts for the other questions assume that there will be a SQLite database on a file called `edmonton.db` inside the `q1` folder. If you do not follow this convention, you need to change the test scripts in every question.

#### What will be graded?

Your TA will grade the `README.md` file inside the `q1` folder, and the `.gitignore` file in your repository. `README.md` should have clear instructions to build the database, while `.gitignore` must have the path to all XML or SQLite files mentioned in your solution.

`The TAs will test your program with insertions, deletions and tuple updates meant to violate the constraints above.`


### Grading--Q1

|Marks|Correctness (60%)|Clarity (20%)|Documentation (20%)|
|-----|-----------|-------|-------------|
| 100%   |The instructions are correct and complete (the TA can create the database by following exactly those instructions and nothing else) **AND** all constraints are implemented correctly and handle insertions, deletions and modifications of existing tuples.| The instructions are properly formatted and clearly written, using proper terminology **AND** the DDL statements are properly formatted and contain comments as needed. | The README file **explains** what each step in the instructions does; the video **explains** what each step of the instructions does. |
| 70% | The instructions are correct but some small steps, even if obvious, are missing but the TA can build a database by guessing what is missing without the help of the student **OR** all primary key and foreign keys are implemented but at least one trigger-based constraint is either missing or incorrect. | The instructions are not clearly formatted on the README.md file **OR** the DDL is not properly formatted and documented.| Comments and explanations (README and/or video) cover some but not all steps in the instructions. |
| 40% | The instructions are incomplete and many steps are missing but the TA can build the database without asking for clarifications from the student **OR** at least one step in the instructions is incorrect but the TA can fix it on their own **OR** all primary key and foreign key constraints are implemented but two trigger-based constraint are either missing or incorrect. | Instructions are confusing or contradictory; necessary parameters are missing **OR** DDL is not properly formatted and/or comments are missing. | Explanations (README and/or video) cover just a few of the steps.|
| 0% | The TA cannot build the database without contacting the student for help **OR** no trigger-based constraint is properly implemented. | Missing. | Missing. |


## Part II -- Embedded SQL


### Required reading:

Before you write any code:

1. Read **all of** [An Introduction To The SQLite C/C++ Interface](https://sqlite.org/cintro.html) very carefully.
+ Read the following documentation:
    * [Database Connection Handle](https://sqlite.org/c3ref/sqlite3.html)
    * [Prepared Statement Object](https://sqlite.org/c3ref/stmt.html), paying especial attention to the part explaining *life-cycle of a prepared statement object*
    * [Result Values From a Query](https://sqlite.org/c3ref/column_blob.html)
    * [Binding Values To Prepared Statements](https://sqlite.org/c3ref/bind_blob.html)
    * [Create or Redefine SQL Functions](https://sqlite.org/c3ref/create_function.html)

### Specifications

For each question, you are asked to write a **C** program (no exceptions or substitutions allowed) that **follows the life-cycle described [here](https://sqlite.org/c3ref/stmt.html)** to accomplish the following tasks. Your programs should work on any SQLite database with the schema as inPart I. Your TA will test your code on multiple databases conforming to that schema and also on invalid inputs.

#### Input/Output

**All input** to the programs must be done via **[command line arguments](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command-line_argument_parsing)** in the order specified in the question, or in text files. A tag given as command line argument will always be a **single string** in the form `key=value` (i.e., a single entry in the argument list). For example, a tag could be `wheelchair_accessible=yes`.

The output of the program must be as specified and match the unit test code provided.

### Q2 (3 marks)

Write a C program, in a file called <span style="font-family: monospace; color:blue">q2/src/solution.c</span> that takes as **input**: the database file and two `node` identifiers, in this order, and prints to `STDOUT` their *geographical distance* **in meters**, computed by a suitable function from [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geographical_distance) and links therein.

The distance must be computed by a new **user-defined SQL function**, and your program must use only **a single query** which must use that function. Add an explanation to the `README.md` file for this question justifying your choice of distance function. Your explanation will count for the documentation marks towards your grade in this question.

**Output:** your program must print to `STDOUT` the geographical distance (i.e., a single number) or the word `error` (in a single line) if the parameters are incorrect (e.g., the database file is missing or the number of node ids is incorrect, or some id is missing from the database).

### Q3 (1.5 mark)

Write a C program, in a file called <span style="font-family: monospace; color:blue">q3/src/solution.c</span> that takes as input the database file and a **list** of strings of the form `key=value`; finds every `node` in the database having at *least one* tag matching a key/value combination from the input list; and prints to `STDOUT`: the number of such node elements, as well as the largest pairwise distance among those nodes.

The maximum distance must be computed **by a single SQL query** that uses the function you created for Q2. (HINT: use CTEs.)

**Output:** your program must print to `STDOUT` two numbers separated by a space or a tab, or the word `error` (in a single line) if the parameters are incorrect.

### Q4 (1.5 marks)

Write a C program, in a file called <span style="font-family: monospace; color:blue">q4/src/solution.c</span> that takes as input the database file and a **list** of strings of the form `key=value`, and finds every `way` in the database having at least one tag matching a key/value combination from the input list; and prints to `STDOUT`: the number of such paths, and the length of the longest such path, computed **by a single SQL query** as in Q3.

All lengths must be computed in SQL, as in Q2/Q3.

**Output:** your program must print to `STDOUT` two numbers separated by a space or a tab or the word `error` (in a single line) if the parameters are incorrect.

### Q5 (2 mark)

Write a C program, in a file called <span style="font-family: monospace; color:blue">q5/src/solution.c</span> that takes as input a database file and a [`tsv` file](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tab-separated_values) containing zero or more lines, each describing a `node` to be inserted into the database. 

In that file, each node must be described by *at least* three columns: (0) the node id, (1) the latitude, (2) the longitude. Subsequent columns in the file correspond to strings of the form `key=value` providing tags for the node, and must be inserted accordingly.

**Output:** your program must print to `STDOUT` the word `success` on a single line if the execution was successful or `error` on a single line followed by the SQLite error message on subsequent lines, in case the input is invalid or some constraint is violated.

**All or nothing**: your program must leave the database unchanged if there is an error on any of the nodes described in the input file.

### Q6 (2 marks)

Write a C program <span style="font-family: monospace; color:blue">q6/src/solution.c</span> that takes as input a database file and a `tsv` file containing zero or more lines describing zero or more `way` elements, which are to be inserted into the database. The format of the input TSV is as follows:

* Each `way` element is described by two consecutive non-blank lines (i.e., blank lines are used to separate `way`s)
* The first such line has the id of the `way` in column 0, followed by zero or more strings of the form `key=value` in subsequent columns, with tags for the way.
* The second line has all the nodes (identifiers) in the way, with the column number corresponding to the order of the node.

**Output:** your program must print to `STDOUT` the word `success` on a single line if the execution was successful or `error` on a single line followed by the SQLite error message on subsequent lines, in case the input is invalid or some constraint is violated.

**All or nothing**: your program must leave the database unchanged if there is an error on any of the ways or any of the nodes described in the input file.

# Grading

Each program will be scored on a four-point scale on three criteria: correctness, clarity, and documentation as follows:

|Marks|Correctness (60%)|Clarity (20%)|Documentation (20%)|
|-----|-----------|-------|-------------|
| 100%   |The program computes exactly the expected answer following **all** restrictions specified for the question: its output is formatted as expected, no errors or warnings are raised during the tests on Github and all values are computed as required. No unnecessary steps are done by the program or SQL statements in it, and all data manipulation expressions and operations are appropriate. The program is generic and would compute the correct answer on *any* legal instance of the schema.| The program and SQL statements it contains are formatted and indented properly. The program is broken down into functions and modules as needed; all necessary sub-queries are declared in CTEs; all tuple variables have readable and sensible names; all tests in WHERE clauses are needed and sensible. | The program and SQL statements in it have appropriate comments; the README file **explains** the intuition behind each step in the query; the video **explains** each step of the program/query instead of essentially reading them. |
| 70% | The program computes the expected answer and does not raise errors or exceptions during the tests on Github, but it contains unnecessary steps **OR** some of the data manipulations are inappropriate. The program is generic and would compute the correct answer on *any* legal instance of the schema. |The program is not modularized or the SQL statements do not use CTEs when possible **OR** tuple variables are not properly named **OR** the code or SQL statements are not properly formatted. | Comments and explanations (README and/or video) cover some but not all steps in the program. |
| 40% | The program correctly computes at least one of the steps necessary for the correct solution **OR** the program computes correctly only some of the tuples in the expected answer **OR** there are unnecessary steps or inappropriate operations in the program or its SQL statements, even if otherwise correct. | CTEs are not used **OR** tuple variables are confusing **OR** query uses unnecessary complicated steps that could be replaced by simpler and cleared ones. | Missing comments **OR** explanations (README and/or video) cover just a few of the steps in the query.|
| 0% | Program does not correctly compute any logical steps needed for the correct solution. | Missing. | Missing. |

